>> Will Carlton, welcome to Talk Python Me.
It's awesome to have you both back on the show.
>> Thank you for having us on again, Michael.
>> Yes, thank you. It's always fun.
>> Yeah, it's always fun to have other podcasters on the show.
You guys have your audio game dialed and it's all.
>> There's a smoothness that comes with it, right?
There's an understanding of the glitches too and just, yeah.
>> Yes, exactly.
Okay, so we'll talk a bit about your podcast in a moment.
Maybe just do a quick introduction.
I know people probably know you from your show Django Chat.
They know you from being on Talk by Dawn previously,
but for those who don't.
Will, we'll go first.
- Sure, so William Vincent.
I have three books on Django,
most notably Django for Beginners.
I run a site, LearnDjango.com.
I just got off three years being on the board of Django,
so Django's run by a non-profit.
I run a weekly newsletter on Django, Django News.
Too many things.
So yeah, most of my time is spent doing some consulting
and a lot of teaching and learning about Django.
So I'm very happy to be at that stage.
- It's a good combination, right?
- If you can make it work, it is.
Yeah, you need that sort of cycle of,
you know, I need to learn too and be interested.
But I really, I like learning and teaching, so.
- One of the challenges that I think people can fall into
of the traps is if you just teach,
it's hard to have that, it looks like a good idea,
but let me tell you, it's a bad idea.
And here's the three reasons,
and here are the tears that I've shed
because I tried this this way.
You need a little hands-on.
Like for me, it's running all the infrastructure
and APIs and mobile app stuff at Talk Python,
which is plenty to get the tears.
I've pulled out plenty of hair,
but I think consulting plus teaching
is a really common mix for that.
You like it?
- Yeah, I do.
I mean, so I've been working on,
so I have this site, learnjango.com,
that I'm trying to consolidate everything onto that site.
And so that's been an effort I've been working on
in earnest the last couple months.
And so it's actually been really fun
to just be an engineer for a change.
And I kind of wish I could find a me
to help me when I get stuck, but there is no,
you know, being, as Carlton will share something,
you know, being stuck is part of the game,
But it's uniquely satisfying and frustrating to code
because everything is solvable,
but still I find things that stop me for a couple of days.
And I'm just like, it brings me back
to the first couple of months of coding
and the terror of like, I'm not smart enough,
I can't do this, but I know that I'll get it done.
And I do get it done.
So you get the yin and yang,
but it's uniquely satisfying to do the commit
and it's done, right?
Whereas even a podcast, it's in the bank,
but it's not quite the same binary feeling of accomplishment.
- That's true.
The getting stuck is frustrating,
but also it means you're about to level up, right?
- Well, that's the thing.
- You've got to figure out something, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, no, it's, I try to be excited about it,
'cause I know if I'm stuck,
then lots of other people are gonna be stuck.
Or a lot of times I'm stuck on one little thing,
and it's really 'cause there's some other thing,
some fundamental that I didn't know as well
as I thought I did.
So we can talk about that, but I have thoughts
and all of that.
So yeah, it's a nice mix to do.
And more importantly, now I have friends and peers
who when I get stuck, I can ask them.
So Carlton, of course, is one of them,
former Django fellow.
- Hey Carlton, help.
- I have a couple others.
So it's important to, we can talk about this,
but when you're learning, learning how to ask
a good question on Stack Overflow,
or Django has its own forum,
which is a great resource, forum.djangoproject.com.
But the next stage is like, I did a walk,
I slept on it, like knowing when to ping a friend,
'cause you don't wanna ping a friend all the time,
but sometimes it's like, okay, like this is,
I'm truly stuck.
There's no point like wasting a week or two on this.
So that's a really nice stage to get to.
And it's also helpful to help other people too,
'cause you're thinking about something
and someone gives you something they're stuck on,
you're like, oh, boom, that's that.
And then you're like, hey, I'm working on,
you know, something that's stuck.
So anyways, having a community is really,
really levels you up too.
And also people who can relate to,
know, good and bad things about code. You know, Django has Django is very stable but has a host of
new features, many of which I haven't actually used. Carlton can talk about them. So it's
important to have community, right? Not just be in your own room with the computer fighting with it.
Like there are other anything you've any trouble or good or bad thing you've had many, many other
people have had, you just have to find them. Yeah, unlike the movie stereotypes, it's way
way more social, this coding thing.
- It is, it is.
- Yeah, before I let Carlton introduce himself,
just a quick comment from the audience to make you
feel good a bit from Bishnu says,
"The first book I read on Django was William's book."
So thank you.
- Thank you, I appreciate that.
Yeah, I just, one last point,
and then I want Carlton to talk,
but I wrote three books,
"Django for Beginners," "APIs Professionals,"
that first came out in 2018 and '19,
and then I've updated all three of them
every year since then.
So on the one hand, it's been four years,
I haven't had a new book, but it's also, I've written what?
- Or you've had to Twardnet books.
- Yeah, I mean, I really have, I really have.
It doesn't feel quite as satisfying,
but I know that I have a built-in audience and I've,
so it's a weird dynamic to be in a situation
where it's sustainable to maintain and update your stuff.
I mean, I'm sure you can relate,
you have all these different courses, right?
That's the thing that falls off.
You do all the effort, you get the course out,
then it goes out of date or it could be made better but finding the...
>> Or Pydantic 2 comes out.
>> Or Django every eight months comes out. Yeah.
>> Exactly.
>> So it's, yeah, I try to think of the positive of it. It is, I feel like the book is so much
better but a layperson or family members or friends are like, "When's the new book coming
out?" It's like, "I just did it." So it's, yeah.
>> Yeah, yeah, indeed. Carlton.
>> Who are you, Carlton?
>> Who are you?
Who am I?
Well, my name is Carlton.
I do a podcast with Will.
So basically I've just stepped down as Django Fellow.
I've spent the last five years being a Django Fellow, which means I was contracted by the
Django Software Foundation to help maintain Django itself.
And they have a couple of Fellows and I was one of them for that period.
And I've stepped down in order to go back to building things with Django rather than
working just on Django.
So it's a kind of, you know, after five years,
that was a good time period.
And it's time for me to go back
to building things with Django.
I've been using Django forever
and I'm a maintainer on a lot of projects in the ecosystem.
So I've worked on Django as framework,
Django filter, Django crispy form,
Django compressor, Django app comp.
I've maintained the channels package.
- Oh, your code runs on many, many servers, you should say.
- More, yeah, more than I like to think about.
So one thing when I was a fellow,
We were always, people always give us a bit of grief
about how conservative Django is.
It's very stable and very, you know,
we're very cautious about making backwards
incompatible changes.
We try not to do that.
We've got a solid deprecation policy.
We've got the long-term support policies.
And then at DjangoCon last year,
somebody read out the numbers, the download numbers.
It's not, you know, it's not necessarily
the most downloaded package, but it's millions,
millions of downloads, millions of projects
that are using it.
And you really can't break it.
And that's always really humbling and really kind of,
yeah, actually all the work we put into making sure
that the product is stable, that's good work.
That's important work.
- Yeah, Threads is using it, Carlton.
You're helping out Mark Zuckerberg.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, well--
- Well, they're using a fork of it.
We can get into that, but yeah.
- But I mean, I was looking at a comment on the forum.
I got a little heart from somebody asked
on the Django forum, does Django scale?
Can I run it on lots of systems and i'm like well
You do know that uh instagram was built on it
you know, they're still using that core request response cycle and
You know, my comment was you're not going to serve more traffic than instagram. So
Yes, creds is built on the you know that core request response bit is still essentially janga
Carlton, what are you working on? Oh, sorry. Go ahead michael
Well, I just think maybe not everyone has is uh up on what threads is no not a parallels programming thing
but a Twitter clone from Meta and Facebook, right?
- Well, and we have-- - Sorry.
We have an interview, maybe we can put in the show notes,
with Carl Mayer, who was original core Django developer,
who then went to Instagram.
So he spoke for an hour about--
So initially, it was pure Django.
And then as they scaled, they did things like they ripped out the ORM,
and they changed this and that.
But there is still a core of it,
the request-response cycle that's in there.
And I think that's another interesting thing is Django, when you get to massive, massive size,
a lot of companies, they have thousands of engineers, right? We have, we Django has just
a community. So as soon as you hop off the guardrails, then you're kind of on your own.
And that's sort of separate debate on whether it's worth it or not, but you can get quite large.
And it's interesting by contrast, I believe Shopify is still on rails, I believe, or seem
to have gone much longer. Carlton, yeah, you have something to add? Well, I don't think it's really,
I mean, I know Instagram moved away from the ORM, but that was quite a long time ago. If you look at
Octopus and Kraken, they're still basically using something that's basically vanilla Django to do.
Yeah, like somebody said. And so, you know, what it was back in, you know, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, when
Instagram were needing to pull away from what Django is, is a lot different from what Django
is it 2.2, 3, 4 now, 4.2 now.
-Gonna be 5, yeah. -Yeah, gonna be 5.
I wonder if they regret that.
I wonder, not necessarily maybe it was the right choice at the time,
but do they kind of wish, like, wish they had access,
if nothing else, to fork version 5 instead of version 1.6?
I wish they'd been a bit more pushback on Django from thinking about,
because what was it that caused them to change?
I think, you know the the move from um it being able to uh root string names strings as view names
like and having to import the view itself and
I think at that point like you know for instagram to rewrite the whole stack it
Was it was too much and in the end they they kind of forked but
It would have been great if we could have kept them on board. I think yeah, I guess for instagram
They can they can you know, it's they've got enough engineering chops
But it would have been much nicer for django if we could have kept them on board, I think
Um, yeah, but well, that's like a quick positive shout out for the whole meta as a larger organization
They seem to be doing a lot for python these days, you know for python. They're really working a lot on
The you know sam gross's initiative on nogil and the faster python and cinder and
You know all that probably does come out of some of the foundational stuff for instagram and running django there
yeah, and I think carl may is still involved in very much in pushing python forwards and
and what they're trying to do.
So, all QDUPS do them.
It's very easy to dog on the big corporations
so they don't pay enough of it.
But it's important to recognize when they do contribute
that yes, actually that's--
- Yeah, there's plenty that need dogging on,
like a lot, most.
- We still have support for Oracle in Django, for example.
- Interesting.
But Carlton, deployment,
there's something else you're working on.
- Well, yes.
I mean, so one thing I wanted to quit
or step down as fellow and get to working
is my button tool, which is my simple deployment tool.
So it's quite vanilla.
It's old school.
It uses virtual private server.
It uses Ansible.
It's all on AWS.
And then I'm building UI and tooling on front of that.
Slightly delayed because I've had personal issues
that have taken me up.
My plan was sit down in April, get on with it.
My son's been ill for a while.
So that's just on the backbone.
The priority with all of these things is look after yourself.
And in the situation we've been in,
I haven't had time to work on it particularly.
But that will be the autumn now.
And that's kind of, yeah, I've been
talking about it for a while, time to actually ship it
and have some capacity to ship it.
But can we give it a--
maybe it's different angle of pitch, which is that--
so it's built on--
so deployment is trick-- we can talk about this.
Going from local to production is hard.
And who do you use these days, right?
Like there's AWS, there's Azure, there's kind of Google,
there still is Heroku, there's new entrants like Fly
and some other ones, but what do you really need?
Like if you're with Django, you want someone
who knows Django who just like puts a layer
on top of someone that's not going away like AWS.
And essentially, as I understand it,
Button is a Django fellow saying,
have a Django app, you want to put it online, let me solve all the hard things, do all the
hard work for you. And it's a beautiful UI on something that's not going to change. Yeah,
here we go. To have it. Because all the... It's interesting. Yeah. I updated my books.
I updated away from Heroku to Fly for the new update because Heroku eliminated their
free tier. And I personally have really liked what Fly.io is doing, but it's hard to scale
these companies. It's non-trivial to build what they have. And yet if you're AWS, all
you're going to do is add, add, add, add features when big enterprise clients want things. And
so at some point it becomes unusable for a solo person or a small startup. So I'm a fan
of what Carlton's doing.
You know what's even scarier? Just go to the AWS console dashboard.
Right.
Yeah.
Exactly.
But you know, really, it's like...
What should I use?
There should be enough of those things. I have a Python web app or I have a JavaScript...
whatever JavaScript people do, like a Rails app.
I just want to get it up and have it not break.
- But this came, so the idea for Button came out
of exactly those kind of thoughts,
was every week on Django chat,
we'd have someone come along,
and deployment would always come up,
and it would be like some elaborate story
about what they're doing.
And it's like, well, actually,
if you keep it simple and keep it neat,
first of all, here's how I deploy,
and here's how I get my clients to deploy,
and here's how I've deployed many projects over many years,
and it's continually evolving.
And then on the other hand, when you go to the AWS console,
though, it's like this, ah, too much.
You don't need 58 services and every configuration option
under the button, under the sun.
But it's nice to be able to break out of that.
You do need to scale, or you do need to do it.
So anyway, this is my project.
If it wasn't for life circumstances,
I'd be slightly further along.
But it's going to be the fall now.
It's going to be--
it's coming on nicely.
And the idea is a simple approach
and with a nice UI on top of it that you can use.
- Well, you definitely have our wishes
for your son to get well soon.
So, that's rough. - Thank you, Mark.
- Yeah, it's rough when you're sick.
- It's been a full on year.
It's been a little over a year now and it's just ongoing.
And so, that was another part
of why I stepped down as fellow.
I needed to take a bit of time just for the family.
Absolutely. I think um back the
Button for a second btn.dev by the way
You can sign up for the mailing list or the or the alpha is available, too
So nice i'm constantly trying to push carlton stuff because he always downplays everything he's doing i'm like come on, man
Like yeah, but i've got that natural developer shyness. I would I have to wait
I have to polish it and wait and he's perfect and then launch it and then yeah, and i'm british
So i'm nice and reserved and you know, anyway, mike, are you gonna make a question?
Well, I was just going to point out that it's exciting.
And we were just talking about it.
We were just hyping people up about it.
How it's cool to have these huge deployments running tons of traffic,
doing all sorts of amazing things with like,
"Yeah, we scaled our server, so we went from 500 to 300 with this trick."
Yes, that's a cool thing that pushes the envelope
that makes a lot of stuff possible with frameworks like Django
and language like Python.
But on the other hand, most of us are not Instagram, you're not Microsoft, you're not Google, you're not all these.
And having, or let's say you're not Netflix, I actually think that like what AWS console looks like has a lot to do with how Netflix works, probably given how early adopters they were.
But I just think it's worth emphasizing.
Push button, get it running on a simple server, make it secure, keep it up.
zero downtime deploy type stuff,
CI/CD, a push to a brand, all those types of things.
That's more than enough for most people. Not just on your hobby projects, but on company business.
Does your website get a thousand visitors a day? It doesn't need five servers with a little failover
and Kubernetes clusters and sharded databases. It just doesn't.
So having that option, something like button,
it's pretty cool, I think.
- Yeah, I mean, that's exactly it.
Like as you speak there,
you're just singing to the choir for me.
It's like, you know, you can get a small box,
get a slightly bigger box if you need to.
Get a slightly bigger box than that.
You can go get quite an,
you can get an awful lot of box for not very much money.
And then maybe one, maybe two boxes.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly.
But this, the kind of architecture I go for,
you can scale to a very big site.
And I know in recent years, Stack Overflow
moved to a much more modern and fancy thing.
But for a long, long, long, long time,
they were running on the same kind of big database,
couple of front-end web servers, a load balancer,
and nothing more than that.
And you're not going to serve more traffic than Stack
Overflow ever.
Like, nobody-- not nobody, but basically, nobody's
going to serve more traffic than that.
So that's where I'm coming from.
And it's not for everybody.
There's lots of people who've got opinions,
but it's for people who haven't got an opinion.
It's like if you don't know how to deploy
and you don't really have--
if you're not already in the game,
then well, this is how I do it.
And you can choose to do it the same way
or you can do it differently.
>>Sure.
>>You know, I'm really excited about it.
And I have been talking about it for a long time
and not having the capacity to work on it.
And now I, bar, you know, the family situation,
I have that capacity.
And so I'm looking forward to getting it out.
And, you know.
Well, I think it's more broadly one of the things we're going to talk about is htmx
And I think there is this these more iterative tools
You know, you don't need to jump to react if you just want a little thing like you don't need to go
I heard back in dev was done. It was just all apis now. Come on
well, I I was it's it's all front end dad, I
Put a toot up the other day that the you know, they convinced me. Otherwise, uh meme was jango is a front-end framework
I'm busy writing an application. I'm using hdmx. I'm using alpine. I'm using tailwind and I'm doing it all in django
I'm doing it all in django templates and it's like
You know, i'm hardly doing any of the exciting back-end stuff that we love django for it's all
Front-end and it's just vanilla django
It is but that's I mean that's the thing that people who are learning
They they're full stack developer and they're like apis. I gotta do it all and I mean you must have this michael with people
your students, but I have this a lot of times,
people who are new say, oh, I want this and that
functionality, and I'm often like,
don't go to APIs unless you need to,
because if you're a professional Django developer
on a team of more than 10 people,
yeah, you're gonna write APIs,
'cause there will be front-end people
who just do front-end, but when it's just you--
- Even if there's not front-end,
there might be a mobile app.
That's our primary use case of APIs.
Or you might have a public API for users
or other companies to work with.
It doesn't have to be that you're not doing server-side.
- But for a solo person or a small thing,
don't just leap to it 'cause it adds so much complexity.
Do you use Tornado or use an older Python?
- I use Pyramid.
- Pyramid, okay. - Pyramid, yeah.
I've considered switching to something like FastAPI
or something like that, but then I look and I'm like,
you know, it's like a real thin layer
over just what would be the same anyway,
and the scalability is totally good.
- I mean, it works, it works, too.
It'll run for months without me touching it.
Like, the chances the website go down,
and it's not my fault 'cause I deployed something,
is almost zero.
Like, really, really, really close to zero.
Either that or something's gone wrong in the data center.
But like, the website itself,
and so, yeah, I chose that eight years ago,
and I'm still cruising with it, it's great.
- I had a client ask me about HA, sorry,
high availability one time.
They were like, "Oh, don't we need multiple servers
"and multiple this and that?"
I'm like, well, how many nines do we need? Um
and
it's like if you if you if you have
I don't know. I can't remember the exact number now off the top of my head, but the the
You're already at three nines even just deploying on the kind of worst
set up in the world because it you the number the amount of downtime you'll have will be
Sub few minutes because and it'll be exactly that you and we deploy and then you revert it. Yeah, exactly. Oh my gosh quick
uh
But we have I think people necessarily don't fully appreciate how much really high-end technology
For so little money we have accessible to us with these cloud providers
All right. We have the the best
Data centers in the world for ten dollars, right? You know what I mean? It's not like well
These people like you have the same thing that netflix is using and for a while. They're doing a third of the traffic of the internet
right
Yes, yeah, yeah, exactly. So three nines gives you nine hours off a year and you you won't even have nine hours off a year
Like yeah, that's highly unlikely. Yeah
you know
You know if something goes down and you don't fix it, but like it's literally if you deploy
You fix it quickly
but you get that kind of uptime without having to have
Multiple availability zones and boiler failover and all the things that you know, they like to sell
Yeah. And yet getting to that point for people who are new, just the act of local versus production
database stops people, like every single person, right? They build the site, like it's a blog,
and then they deploy it. And they're like, "Where's my blog?" And it's like, "Oh, well,
that database is different than this database." Like, you know, after a while, I get used to that
idea. But it's like, the code is there. Why isn't the data there? Right? And then, so it's just this
scale of up to how many nines do you need. But most people are focused on just put something
up online and add continuous integration. I mean, really, what are the basics? But they're
not basic when you're doing it the first couple times. No, they're not basic. They're not basic
at all. So having something that kind of automates that. I think another thing is
you have different team members or if you're an individual developer, maybe getting something up
on the web, I know people I've spoken to about how daunting it is. Going from I've got zero
web apps published to one is a major challenge, right? Like I don't know Linux, I don't know
the terminal, I don't do SSH, I don't understand the security, I don't understand the best practices,
like I just can't, you know? Yeah. Well, and that's something I emphasize in my books is getting
something up as fast as possible. It was a little bit smoother with Heroku than Fly, but Fly is still
pretty like I take some shortcuts but I tell I say they're shortcuts you know this isn't
the most secure thing ever but just getting something up that first time because it doesn't
have to be crazy complicated I think the sooner you're dealing with a real live website the
better for many reasons but yeah that first the first one you know you've spent all this
time building your application you're finally ready to you know put it online and then it's
It's like, oh, learn about servers and learn about firewalls and learn about rewrite rules
and learn about permissions and groups and users.
Caching, yeah.
But it's kind of nuts.
Sorry, go ahead, Will.
Well, I was just saying Django has a deployment checklist to help with this, but I still think
and others may agree with me in the community that the local to production gap is a big
one that Django could do things to address.
example, like everything defaults to local setup. The deployment checklist, yes, a great
resource. I spend a lot of time in my books covering this if you want, you know, hand
holding.
But it's not just a checklist on the like on the web that you look at, you can run manage.py
test, you know, space check.
Yes, management command. And there's a whole, you know, I guess would be the I think, how
many 12 or something now is sort of the, like, really don't launch it without this. These
These aren't even optimizations.
This is like, just don't leak secrets everywhere.
But still for Django, and I think for a lot of places, there's a tension between how friendly
you are to beginners versus advanced users.
I think Django overall has done a very good job of still being friendly to beginners,
but most technologies over time move towards where the hardcore users are, because that's
who's doing this stuff.
So that's a tension Django feels, Python, others.
Why do you still keep it beginner friendly, but the people who are in charge want different
things often?
So, that's a real thing.
>> That's a real tension in programming and frameworks and all sorts of things.
And I also think that that's why Python is so popular, honestly.
You can do C++, you can do Rust.
These are really great for advanced people.
You can do, you know, BB6 or super simple old school things that are great, easy for
beginners.
But like Python is easy for beginners,
but you can kind of bring in some more advanced stuff.
You can bring in async, you can bring in generators,
you can bring in ORMs, but you don't have to, right?
Where a lot of languages are like,
guess what, we're gonna start with a void voice,
void star star, we're gonna go from there, you know?
- Yeah, well, the old saying was second best for everything.
And I think that's not, you know,
I think it's first best a number of places now too.
I agree. I think people say that, but I think honestly, if it's not the first best, it is on par with the other first best. It is a front-running contender for a thing where I would say it probably is the undisputed king as in data science and machine learning.
Yes.
There's not a competitor out there that is near the level of...
Because there's R and R doesn't have open source
in the community that Python does.
Yeah.
It seems to be.
I mean, most like here in Boston,
a lot of friends are scientists
and it's either R or Python
and they all kind of want to use Python,
but sometimes they use R.
But Python just can do more things.
So depending on what you need.
Yeah.
The next episode I'm going to release,
which I've already recorded, but I haven't released.
so you all don't know about it necessarily,
is Shiny for Python, which is pretty interesting.
Like that's the R web story coming to Python,
which I think is just more cool stuff
you can do in Python, honestly.
- Yeah, well, actually I need to check
the Python version of that,
'cause one of the, we just had DjangoCon Europe
earlier this year, and one of the people
who came up to me is someone who worked for the,
what do you say, the UK government,
they're putting systems together. And he had bought my books to get his team to move-
Is it started with double O or something or other? I don't know.
No, not that cool. It's just COVID information, health stuff, NHIS. Is that, yeah, Nathan and
Holt, NHS. But they were able, so he had said that they were able to use R and use the,
what is it called, the Webby to put things online. But for interactivity,
that's where they hit problems. So he and his team of 12 had moved a lot of stuff over to Django
for the just more interactivity of it all. But this is something the British government was doing.
So it's an area I want to learn more about Shiny and how all that works because it's always been
like, why can't you just take a Jupyter notebook and put it online? Often put it online. So I'm
I'm trying to understand that too,
because the data science space is so big
and the web space feels small in comparison,
but yeah, I look forward to that episode.
- Yeah, well my quick takeaway, talking to Joe there,
was they really thought about how to make it
the Pythonic way, and it seems like they really embraced it,
not just we'll get it to run on Python,
but it seems like it's gonna be a good option
for people out there, so that's really cool.
All right, I wanna make sure that we talk about
some of the history of Django and the future of Django.
But I know something that all three of us are super
excited about is HTMX.
So let's, and we were talking about it,
the front end stuff and the back end.
And so I don't typically share jokes
on TalkByThon that much.
It's more Python Bytes the show at the end there.
But there's this great meme and it has the back end dev
and it has HTMX, two people on the HTMX one
speaking to the back end dev.
Says, "Look at me, look at me."
HTML is talking to you.
This is full stack now.
You're full stack now.
Come on.
You're not just a backend developer,
you're full stack 'cause you're doing HTML.
I think, you know, it's funny.
Also the thing called X that is kind of Twitter
and half X and partially branded,
that is a whole different joke.
But I think just this joke up here,
it really touches on something that I think
makes Django, makes Blast,
make all the Python web frameworks way more holistic
and important coming back to build these apps, right?
It's not just like, well, we have to use React,
so we're gonna push you to just write JSON endpoints
and so on and so on.
No, you can actually flip that
and just embrace Python more with HTMX.
Who wants to start riffing on HTMX and Django?
- Carlton, you go ahead.
This is more of your--
- Well, no, it's exactly that.
So, I mean, two years ago, three years ago,
it was all like, oh, Python's existential threat
because everything's gonna be rewritten in JavaScript
because everything on the front end is JavaScript.
And so it doesn't make sense having these two languages.
So it's all gonna just swipe over
and Python's gonna disappear in a puff of JavaScript.
Well, now it's kind of like, well, really,
is that what I see happening?
No, what I see is the super established,
Mature web framework showing the real strength of the the html tooling and the hypermedia tooling that they've you know
It's it's just so fully developed. I mean jango's 18 years old summer, right? So it's there's a lot of history there
There's a lot of development time gone in there's a lot of richness and once you start using
Htmx it really is it's like oh, do you know what this just fits the patterns that?
Django wants you to use, you know, it did like it works with django forms and just
You know, oh look, it's just a form view and it's just all I do is, you know
Add this little header in and oh look. I changed the template maybe and oh look. It's it's a fully interactive rich
client that you know, you the
Users can't tell the difference between that and a full spa you build redirect or perhaps they can because it loads quicker
Because it's not it's actually faster and one of the great
Reasons for switching to SBAs was they were meant to be quicker
But the reality is after all these years
they're loading so much javascript into the page and doing so much work in the browser in order to get the
The html to be interactive that in fact they feel slower to the user
Yeah, they just uh
So for people who don't know htmx lets you put attributes on html not complicated stuff
Like if you had an image you could say hx-get and give it a url
And you could say hx-target is some other thing.
So if you click on that image, it'll go,
get this context, talk to Django,
pull out back a fragment of HTML and pop it
with possible animations and transitions and stuff
into another section for like a master detail,
like lists, details, view story.
And it's just as nice as most single page app,
most front end frameworks.
I suppose if the thing completely loaded
all the different data and had zero server interaction,
but then the startup time of that would be completely bad,
like you said, Carlton.
So yeah, I think it's fantastic.
And let's go back to like the beginner
and the people doing simple stuff.
HTMX is not just for beginners,
but it really works well for them
because they no longer have to learn a different framework
or never different language and a framework
like JavaScript and Vue.
They don't have to write APIs.
they just do the thing they're doing and all of a sudden,
all this cool interactivity comes in, right?
- Yeah, and like for a decade, it hasn't felt to me,
you know, I'm 20 years in the business,
I know how to do quite a lot,
but for a decade or so, it hasn't felt to me feasible
to be building web, good high quality,
professional quality web applications single-handed.
But it feels like that again.
It feels like, do you know what?
I don't need a whole team here.
And with interest rates going up and inflation going up,
You know, money being tight now, I honestly think there is a, a real big
commercial competitive advantage.
Coming back to sort of the backend and that's not just Django, but
Jack Django flask and the, you know, rails, even if you want a different
language, but those kinds of stacks where you, you can produce a really
competent crowd backend in very little time, and then you can produce the
front end that's rich enough and feels good and feels developed for a fraction of the
team size, one, two developers instead of five, ten developers.
Yeah.
I think it also speaks to the wisdom, I would say, of Django has a templating language,
but it's deliberately basic.
You can use Jinja and Django, you know, by design, because 15 years, 18 years ago, the
idea was, well, we're not a front end framework, who knows what's going to happen.
that provides the opportunity for HTMX comes along, just slide it right in. Like Django
is not doesn't have all this stuff built on top of it trying to do that too. So that can
be a frustration for beginners that why doesn't why don't the templates do more, they actually
do a lot, but it opens it up to, you know, HTMX. And then there's Django has third party
package system. So there's one that Adam Johnson, who's a member of the community has Django
HTML that has extensions, like basically everything you want to do, you can kind of copy and paste
it in. I mean, understand what you're doing, but so this, yeah, Django HTML is a great resource.
But it's not, it's not rocket science. It's not, you know, you're, you're not reinventing the wheel,
right? You have a list view, detail view, you want to do auto scroll, you want to do some
validation on a form, it's the same solve problems out there, you just have to know where to go quite
Far with it. Yeah
I I mean, yeah
It's yeah, that would be an interesting question of where do you really need to not use it I mean
Certainly
Even in a team setting, you know, like it's just such
Less complexity and it's arguably faster and it gets you what you need
So the scenarios that I can think of
Yeah, sorry. Go ahead carl
- Well, I was just gonna say,
and onto this point of Will's about where do you not use it.
So I'm building a quite rich drag and drop interface
for a tool.
But it's pretty complex, it's pretty interactive,
and I'm using Alpine to do that on the page.
And then, but when it comes back to the server request,
then dropping back to HTMX to send the things
and get a chunk back,
and I can quite often replace either a part
or all of the Alpine component with the stuff
from the HTMX, but still using rich JavaScript
in the client where you need it.
But you go an awful long way before you need that,
you know, and you're dropping in forms
and you've got a nested list view
and you're fetching that nested list view
and dropping that in place, and that's in a modal
which is perhaps powered by Alpine,
and it looks rich and smooth and it's everything you want,
But the amount of code is very minimal, very minimal.
- It's progressive too, right?
I mean, Vue.js, when it first came on the scene,
I forget if it's still doing this,
but like its whole thing was the progressive,
you know, you don't need the full React bundle,
you can kind of ramp your way in.
And so I think there's just more ways
to get from here to there.
And you don't have to just go to APIs
and the full blown things.
- I have to admit, last week I was,
or perhaps the week before,
I was sitting there going, I was doing everything with HTMX
and I was like, I need a full page load here.
I need it to refresh the whole page.
How do I do that?
And I had to step away, go and get a coffee.
And as I was boiling the kettle, I was like,
oh, I could just submit the form normally.
(laughing)
I'll fall back to just doing what the browser does
by default.
Oh yeah, okay.
- You just always have to think if it's getting clever,
like you're missing something.
- Yeah, yeah, no, it was exactly that.
It's like I was so in the zone that I'd forgotten,
You know the the base technology I was using
Yeah, I I did a talk at pi bay
the food cart edition a couple years ago, and I was talking about it on
on x
Twitter whatever that thing we're gonna figure this out until that thing's that that thing might be gone pretty soon, but we'll see
Anyway, I I was talking about it and I said look you can you can write these awesome web apps with python
You don't have to use javascript and somebody's like michael. That's really insensitive
people, you shouldn't be degrading the JavaScript developers
and like, you know what, that's not the message.
It's the message that the language you choose,
whatever it is, you can just embrace that and do a lot more.
And like the biggest example of that is that
this is a popular framework in the Node community, right?
Which is JavaScript, right?
And the big value here is that you don't have to
also have APIs, you don't have to also have a front end
and a backend framework in the context, right?
Like you guys probably know,
as I've been teaching and helping people deploy stuff,
it's like, well, there's what your front end can do,
and then there's the security of the browser,
and there's all the constraints of that.
And then your backend server,
oh, it can talk to the database directly,
and it could do these other things.
But with HTMX, like your front end code
executes in the same context as your backend code.
So you don't have to have like two security models,
two runtime models, two all these,
two conceptual ways of like,
Well, what's okay? It's happening here. So that means this like no it like all happens in one place and that's even valuable
If you were doing node in javascript
Yeah, no, absolutely. I think there's a on the htmx website. There's an awesome essay
It could be the intercooler
but it talks about this impedance between the the two the two sides and the example it gives is um graph ql, I think
and
The the graph ql gives amazing power onto the front end and you construct all these queries
But are they safe and are they who knows and what companies end up often end up doing is white listing the query
So it's in fact
You can't leverage the full expressive power of graphql in the client because it's only a certain number of queries which are allowed
um in order to get over this um security problem those essays there are just phenomenal, um
Well, we can we I mean we should mention so carlton's given two talks this year one of them at
DjangoCon Europe, it touches upon the locality of behavior. I just put in the show notes for you,
Michael. It's one of the essays, but some of his projects, I saw everyone around me was writing
down. Perhaps you want to expound on that idea, Carlton, because it's not necessarily a new idea,
but it really seemed to resonate at DjangoCon with people.
Yeah, I mean, so the talk was called yak shaving to where the puck's going to be. And it was about,
it's just been about what I've been doing since I stepped down as a fellow in
End of march. So april I sat down to start writing software with django again rather than on django as I said at the beginning
and
the the sort of the hook that I built the whole talk around was htmx and this idea of locality behavior and so
The example that I gave in the talk and which is from the essay there is you know
htmx has got just the the one html file open versus a jquery example, which is very similar, but it's over two files and
you know
But if you just it's not the only consideration but in that one case, you've got one file open versus two files open
well, there's better locality of behavior where you've got one file open and
that
That that really when I read that essay really like struck a bell with me for years
I've been talking to clients about this and like you've got a form a django form and it's perhaps only got
Four lines or three lines. It's virtually nothing and it'll be off on its own in a separate forms.py file
rather than next to the view that you're working on.
And so you have to go and open that second form,
stop five, PIVAR to see the form.
And it's always just declares the fields
and that's all it does.
And then you go back to the view
and you have to kind of remember it
was if you just move that form kind of next to the view,
all of a sudden it's all within one screen on your editor.
And it's much easier to understand.
And then your speed of development increases.
And the more I've been playing with this,
the more I've used this, it's just like,
Yeah, actually, I'm able to work much faster by focus,
particularly of a new code.
Like when your code starts to get bigger and more gnarly
and more curly, and there's more bits to it,
then okay, you want to break it out
so that it remains maintainable.
But when you're first working on it
and there isn't much of it and it's constantly in flux,
keeping it all together, it just helps you go faster.
It's this idea of locality of behavior.
It's phenomenal.
I'm just a massive fan of it.
- Yeah, it's really a brilliant framework.
So, for Django people, Django-htmx,
that's where the magic is to get it easily integrated?
- Yeah, so the basics of that is a middleware
which will add an htmx attribute to the request object
which lets you query it.
So is this an htmx request?
Has it got this header?
Is it wanting to redirect?
Is it wanting to do a full page refresh?
Is it got the various headers that htmx sends
that will embed those?
A few other niceties as well. But yeah, you you may as well use that. That's a good package from that
Yeah, yeah adam knows what he's talking about
Nice. All right
Django 18 18 years old. Yes. Yes. Amazingly amazingly. what can I say?
Um, we can talk about enough to vote. Yeah. Yeah old enough to vote. Yeah
It is old enough to vote not to drink yet, so it's not going to get into trouble and yet
It's only solid in Europe.
Yeah, OK.
Well, that's true.
Yes, OK.
In Europe, it actually-- it totally is.
I remember when we lived there, my daughters were 16,
and we took them out for their 16th birthday.
So--
OK, fantastic.
Yeah.
Yeah, but in the US, we have these rules.
Well, yeah.
I was going to say, so two things.
So Django has major releases updated every eight months.
So 4.2 came out in April, 5.0 come out in December.
In between, there's 4.2.1, 4.2.2. This is all the work the fellows, Carlton, would do.
But there's also, so in the Django News newsletter, there is almost every day,
there is a new PR accepted and merged into Django. So on the Django News newsletter,
one of the things we have now is a section highlighting the changes this week. And I
And I think last week there were 18 new PRs.
And that's not just someone opening it up.
That's like open, discussed, accepted, reviewed.
There's so much activity going on.
So even as it's 18 years old and it is mature,
there is still just so much happening.
And I think that's one of the messages Carlton
and I try to get to people is it's not just
this static thing at all.
There's so much that's happening.
And yet it won't break on you, unlike some other newer
technologies.
I mean, just one quick talk about the influx of tickets.
Why does Django need fellows?
The reason it needs fellows is because there's basically five new tickets every single day.
There's over a thousand new tickets a year, 1,200 new tickets a year every year.
And they keep getting handled.
They keep getting dealt with.
The PRs keep getting merged.
The security releases keep coming.
And without the fellows, it just wouldn't have happened.
Would have sort of just ground into an ever bigger ball of unanswered tickets unresponded, you know things and so
Without it's it's a project of such a size that without the paid
role, it just wouldn't be maintainable. Yeah, I mean
I'm just gonna say some of these do get resolved. I mean how long was lily's one on database constraints that was
Okay. Yeah, so 13 years. Yeah tell that story. Yeah
So this is going to be this is one of my favorite features of django 5.0
It's coming out. So we haven't even talked about django 4.2, but django 5.0 is coming out soon and in there
So there's good. There's um some really big ones. There's um database defaults
So in you've always on a model field you've always been able to declare a default value
So, you know if there isn't one give it a date time field give it now if it is a you know, classic default
um, but those are from 5.0 you'll be able to declare those as database defaults, which
You may not seem sound like much but a it's quicker. It's moving work into the database
But b not every not every connection to your database goes by your django application. So you're able to have
um, you know a database level default and so if there is a script which isn't using the django rm
Then you still get the value of that and that ties in with work that's been done on constraints with database constraints
Have been massively powered up and they'll even now, you know
Your form generation will generate validators that are based on the database constraints
And it's ah just so much richness coming out. I think I really think we're also going to get database cascades
In django 5.0. It's so it's nearly ready. There's a month or so before the feature freeze
I think it's going to go in in which case we're going to have db defaults and db level cascades both
You know added to jango both of those it's a decade or more. Um
In the resolving um in a new release and that's it's just oh wow, that's really exciting. Um
A job for a lot of people, a lot of companies, the database is the source of truth for the
exact right.
And like, sure, your code may talk to it, but what is in the database, like there are
people whose job it is to defend the schema, they call them DBAs, right?
Yeah.
So Django 4.2 added DB comments.
So you could add schema level comments to your model fields to explain the use of the
model field.
It's for people who are serious about their databases,
these features are just massively important.
- Yeah, and I think it's certainly worth considering
that there will be other apps, there will be other tools,
and maybe even data science, right?
The data science angle is huge.
Often wants to now talk to the database,
and even if it's in Python, it's unlikely that in Jupyter
you're gonna pull in your ORM,
you're probably using some other data science
oriented library to talk to that.
And so pushing those defaults down is valuable.
- Well so Michael, you're as situated as anyone
to answer this.
Carlton and I are in the Django world,
but how do we bridge the data science to web?
Doesn't need to be Django world.
Like what, do they need to be on the web?
And if so, what's holding them back?
'Cause it just feels like this megaton star
of data science in this tiny little web thing.
How do they share stuff?
How do they interact with it?
- Yeah, you've got your notebook
and then you wanna publish it somewhere, right?
I mean--
- Yeah, or just share your information
or you have a database of COVID things.
For example, in the UK, you wanna put online
but let people make change in some way or make requests.
I mean, the data isn't generally static.
- So I think there's two answers from my perspective.
I think there are the frameworks that are doing that
and that would be things like Streamlit,
is it Dash?
Not Dashly, but the other dashboarding one.
There's panel,
Street, did I say Streamlit?
Probably started with that one, right?
So those kinds of things where you can get like kind of
a simplified view, that's kind of an interactive thing.
You wouldn't look at it like we're looking
at this Django site and go, yeah, it looks like,
it feels like this, right?
It doesn't feel like that.
It feels like you pushed a kind of a interactive,
>> I think that's a pretty good answer for a lot of people.
I think another is honestly,
the stuff with HTMX.
You need a lot of interactivity in many of these things,
these data screens and to get that interactivity often.
>> You don't need like G3 or something.
>> Yeah. You need it to remember,
we computed this stuff and I want it to give me the other info.
You need a lot of interactivity.
You kind of need, just because how long it takes
to do a lot of the computation,
you want a somewhat stateful type of behavior.
And I think HTMX with Plotly or something like that,
even Matplotlib, I've done some Matplotlib stuff,
and just like returned it as an image in different areas.
And yeah.
Carlton, what do you think?
- Yeah, no, I'm nodding, that's a good approach,
because you can quite easily put in
a little loading indicator there,
when the HTML is ready.
And just even if it took the same amount of time
by just putting in that little animation while it loads,
it feels as if it's responsive and doing something.
And it's not rocket science.
- Indexer, yep.
- Yeah, you know.
So I was nodding particularly when you said just,
you know, use matplotlib and pull it in as an image.
It's like, yeah, that goes an awful long way
doing that kind of thing.
- Yeah, I wasn't familiar with Streamlit.
That's really cool.
I mean, it makes sense.
It's got to be some people doing this, solving this problem.
- Yeah, Streamlit is really, really interesting.
Basically, you have a regular script
that's not even a web thing,
and you put decorators onto the functions,
and it says, oh, this parameter here
is gonna be a combo box or something,
and it knows how to wire the events.
It's some voodoo, but it's cool.
But it does look like a Streamlit app, right?
it doesn't look like, well, here's my own custom website.
It's like, well, here's my Streamlet app
that I built for you, right?
So there's--
- Right, but I mean, and yet, you know,
many people are using Tailwind now.
And so every site looks like a Tailwind site
and before it was Bootstrap and before, you know,
so it's like, we can't get too high on our horse about it,
you know, 'cause at the end of the day,
it's like, it just needs to look modern-ish and like move on.
- Yeah, absolutely, absolutely.
And getting something out is super important.
- Okay, so Django is, I would say it is the oldest
popular Python web framework period, right?
- Yeah, probably.
- There may have been ones before,
but it certainly seems to be of the few
that are really, really popular,
the one that's been around the longest.
- Yeah, I mean, yeah, and I think it's,
I mean, what's amazing for me about it
is the way the community kind of keeps refreshing itself.
Like it's not like the founders of Django
are still merging every commit and every PR, far from it.
I think Simon Willis made a commit in either 4.1 or 4.2,
I can't remember, it was his first one for six years
kind of thing.
- He doesn't even live in Lawrence anymore, I mean, come on.
- Yeah, right, exactly.
- None of them do, yeah.
- But the point being is that it was set up deliberately
to like hand it on, let it go.
And I think Django's probably on its fourth
or even fifth cohort of generation of maintainers now.
And there's a whole fresh batch of faces in the community
who are doing new and exciting things.
And it's just so wonderful to see
'cause you get old and long in the tooth
and you think, "Oh, I'm worried about the future of Django."
No, Django's doing great, actually.
- Yeah.
- Well, and this is something--
- Yeah, just think of it.
Go ahead, go on.
- I was just gonna say that at DjangoCon,
we talk about Django things.
And one of the things we don't necessarily describe
others is what makes Django different than other frameworks out there. It is the community.
Flask is an amazing resource and David Lord and people do great work, but there's no Flask
cons. It's its own thing, but Django is relatively unique in that it's a non-profit. It has fellows,
it has conferences, it has this whole ecosystem, third-party packages. So there's the saying,
for the framework, stay for the community. It really is true, but you can't get that
across to someone who just looks at the Django website, which looks like what it is, which
it hasn't been redone in a number of years. You think, "Oh, maybe it's a little bit of
a stale, crusty Python thing." It's like, no, it's alive. There's changes every day.
You're just not seeing it. And it's hard to... You're HTMX. Carson does amazing work, but
I think it's pretty much just him. It's not this community of dozens and dozens of people.
And so one of the exciting things for Carleton and me is we're both transitioning away a
little bit, but still helping bring in new people.
And that's healthy, right?
Like we know a bit, but sometimes I get, you know, I know the things that kind of I would
like to change that may not change as quickly.
And then new people have great ideas and enthusiasm.
It's like, yes, let me support you because I don't want to get stale with this.
Yeah, absolutely.
- Pradip Bhan asks a pretty good question,
which I think is a good question for any really large
project that's been around a long time.
It's like how do you get more involved with Django?
For someone who's not proficient in Django,
like super, super proficient,
given that it's a mature project,
it's really hard to get that first PR written.
- Okay, so one thing that often comes up,
oh, there's no low-hanging fruit,
It's a mature framework. There's nothing easy to do inside. Well, yes and no. Yes. No, there are there are very few like
You know nothing fixes, you know that
An absolute beginner can just come in and get because they get snapped up really quickly and they just don't hang around for very long
But we've got something like 800 open accepted tickets on django now of those 800 tickets
Some of them are truly hard like adding database defaults, which took you know
It took a dozen years and five django con sprints and you know, who knows what to actually get?
over the line that's
Truly hard, but most of the tickets aren't like that. Most of the tickets are no harder than a problem that you're solving in your everyday
django or python
programming work and what they need is time and love and so
Um django cons i've run. Um django sprints
I've run a kind of getting contributed workshop and the goal of it. You've only got a couple of hours
It's only like half a morning and the goal is not to necessarily get your PR in but it's just to get you
To look at a ticket in a bit of depth get set up with the test suite
You know install it get set up
but get involved in a ticket and come to
Understand that ticket and realize that actually after that a couple of hours of thinking about that ticket you are literally the world expert on
That that ticket and even though you're not like old established. I'm not a Django fellow
I'm not established contributor you you as the world expert on that ticket you have
a valid opinion and your insight will be valuable and yes you have to dig around
and you have to learn some source code but you'll have an idea and it's
going to be on the right track and if you put the time and work and love in
you'll be able to resolve that ticket and once people have had that experience
then it's like oh I can do another one and I can do another one and I can it
can become the little side hobby and actually then I'm a Django contributor
so it's take your time pick a ticket really focus on it become the world
expert
And in so doing even if you don't resolve the ticket
You will learn an awful lot about django. You think you know django by developing django apps all day
Well, you start digging around in the code. I'll guarantee you'll know it a lot better afterwards
so that would be what I say is
Find a ticket that grabs you and just take that little bit of time to to to really understand it
Yeah, that's great advice
I guess there's probably sprints you could drop into at some conferences
Yeah, so after the django concert there's two days of sprint stay around
There's a really great opportunity to meet people who are contributing and to get into contributing and be able to sit in the same room
As somebody and say well, you know, how do I get started? How you know?
Yeah, that is a good good play
But you can I just sit there and look over your shoulder and as you two work on this. Yes. Yes
I mean, yeah, that was the most recent django con. So there's django con us django con europe
there's going to be a DjangoCon Africa this year for the first time. But the most recent DjangoCon
US, I was at a sprint, talking with David Lord, who's the lead maintainer on Flask. And he had a
question about something or other. And someone was like, Oh, like Simon Wilson knows about that.
So I was like, Oh, grab Simon over and they'd never met. And now it's like, Oh, like, so if
you can stay for the sprints, it seems like the nothing part, it's actually, I'd almost take the
sprints over the conference, if you could, because it's literally just like anyone you want to talk
to. And you don't have to, "What are you working on?" They're the best part. Maybe it seems
intimidating, but it's really not. And to Carlton's point, the community really is welcoming.
So even, especially if you're inexperienced, if you're making an effort and people can
see that, they will be encouraging and want to loop you in.
I should mention, there's a new, we can put a link, program called Django-Naut that's
trying to pilot having some mentors to give this kind of hands-on help a little bit. So
that's a new program. It's only, I think, six people right now, but they're trying to
foster more mentoring of this type. But it is a challenge for a mature framework, right?
You probably can't just go fix HTML. It's probably a little more meaty, but it's not
all hard just because it's there. It's just that it got stuck for whatever reason. It
It's as Carlton said, that oomph of someone to come in
and put a couple hours and then be the world expert.
- Absolutely.
So what's the async story, Django these days?
How's it looking?
- It's looking really good.
So do we get to talk about 4.2?
Yes, Django 4.2 brought in async support
for streaming responses.
So within the core framework itself,
you can do service and events,
you can have a request come in, you can keep it open without blocking the worker,
and you can periodically send messages down. That's really quite exciting in 4.2.
And the other thing that came in 4.2 was PsychoPG 3, which allows async database connections.
And so there's a link in the show notes there. Somebody put together exactly what I was hoping
for which was the chat example but done 100% async.
So without blocking ORM call with the server center events instead of long polling or without
having to use an add on like channels which add on channels is great if you need it but
isn't it cool that you can do server center events just in Django.
And then in 5.0 which is coming we're going to have HTTP disconnect handling so there's
long-lived requests if the client disconnects, you'll get an async IO cancel there in your
view and you'll be able to respond to it and do any cleanup.
We've also in 5.0, we're going to have async signals, which gives you an 100% async request
response pathway if you want it.
Because before the only blocking bit there was the signals, which was synced.
So you still had to do this sync to async, jump into a thread pool to dispatch the signals.
back. If you've got async signal handles will all be async as well. So the entire request response
flow can be async and then sessions is going to be async in 5.0 as well. Auth is going to be async
as well in 5.0. So those kind of core flows are, you know, this is on top of the async interface
to the ORM which was added. You know, it's all fleshing out and there's a few decorators which,
You know aren't yet done, but they'll be done over the next few releases. It's really enriched and it's like yes. Yes
Five six years seven years of work has gone into this and
It's really maturing nicely. So I think async in django is very a very exciting time. so people say I want
Yeah fast api, right? That's always the thing. Well, why not just use fast api?
Well, no, if you want to use fast api go use fast api, but if you're using django
But you need a couple of these endpoints which you need higher throughput or you know, what or you know a real-time or two
Two-directional traffic or whatever. You shouldn't have to switch red framework just to have a couple of these
These endpoints right? It's like python python needs to be in every area because you shouldn't have to switch language just because you need
I don't know what
To be a bit more serious about things so python needs to be able to account for those more serious use cases
well same with django it needs an async story because you shouldn't have to change your web framework just for you know, service and events or
or I don't know what other async,
you know, a bit of real time, you might need.
- Yeah, and nothing, almost nothing waits on other things
like web frameworks do, right?
They wait on database calls, they wait on the network,
they wait on caches, you know, like Redis,
they wait on maybe calling other APIs,
like almost everything they do is coordinating
other systems and waiting and then turning that
to HTML or JSON.
And so having this rich async support is fantastic.
- Yeah, no, I mean, it's really coming on.
And there are still, you know, there are bits inside,
you know, I don't know if you need the, I don't know,
user passage test decorator, permissions decorator.
Is that yet async defined?
I'm not sure if it is, but okay, that's not,
we haven't got to, maybe we have, I need to check,
but we haven't got to that bit yet.
But okay, those kind of bits, we'll get there with those,
but that kind of core, you know,
The core i'm building something
On the request response cycle with auth with sessions. Yeah, that's all now done. and so
really maturing
excellent
Getting short on time here guys
It's so nice to have you be in charge of this I should say right because whenever there's those pauses like my instinct is
To jump in and like look at our notes, but like just like nope, you're you're captain of the ship. It's so nice. Yeah
We're just out for a sunset cruise in the old bow,
or coming back to the harbor.
So what else about the future?
We talked about Django being 18, a lot of the cool ideas
and projects and resources.
But what about the future, some of which we just covered,
is really exciting, maybe we haven't given time to yet?
I'm personally excited about the new people getting involved.
I know that's not as tangible for folks,
but coming from DjangoCon, coming,
like I just stepped off the board
as treasurer for three years.
You know, I know who the new treasurer is,
the current president.
Like I'm really excited about the new people.
And so I don't, for a while during COVID,
I think some of us had concerns about like,
you know, how do we keep this afloat
and not have everything crash and burn?
But I don't have those concerns anymore.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- And so just the fact that if you want something in Python
that solves almost every web problem you have
and has a really supportive community,
Django is still there for you.
And so I guess that's the big one.
It's just, and I think from a marketing side,
it's just how do we express that it's still cool
and interesting and powerful and yet won't break on you?
It doesn't seem as shiny and new as the next whatever,
but it's like if you look on Hacker News,
every like six months, someone's like,
"Wow, Django's like still around?
"Oh, it's like kind of solves all these problems
you have with this new JavaScript this or that. It's like, yeah, it's still just doing its thing.
Sorry, so I would say the community side. I mean, also, like I've got projects,
if you want to learn Django, I mean, like, let me, there's a lot of resources to learn it. There's a
number, there's videos, you know, you have videos, books, tutorials, like some of these newer
technologies. It's harder. There's not a community and it's harder to find the resources, you know,
There's a lot of strength in being around for a while and yet not being totally stale
So that would be my my tagline for django. How's that?
Well, you know I
I kind of go off that I I think actually it's it is cool and it's about as cool as it's been for a while
I said in my uh django con europe talk that i'm as excited about the framework and where it's going now as I have been
For for many years since I said since the drf kickstarter if you remember that back in the the day
There are over the last few releases and I don't just mean 4.2 and 5.0 coming up. I mean like the last
3.2 4 4.0 4.1 like
Last few years there's been a number of threads not just the async stuff
There's been massive changes to the forms templating. There's been all these changes to the orm that powering up every single release
And they've all come together and there are patterns now to be discovered
Then and it's like I said, I'm stepping down in part because of life
But in part to get back to working with django rather than just on django
I do I want to play with all of these new toys that we've built over the last few releases
And I want to discover those patterns and see them codified and see them come out in the community and it's just a massively fertile time
Um, and so that's what i'm excited about. That's where we're going
and I can't say every release django literally
Gobsmacked by how many new features you think? Oh, there won't be any in the new one, but it gotta be done
Again five point. Yeah, but 5.0 is coming out and it's just hitting out of the park again
And it's like wow, we've only just had 4.2 4.2 is not even old yet
5.0 is not even in alpha and we're already thinking. Oh, can we run it off main because it's so exciting.
the future is just
It so many things have come together. The future is just really exciting. So that that is my take. Yeah
Yeah, and I'd say I feel like I would be bored by now with django like i'm i've only been doing it for over a
Decade but like i'm if anything more interest, there's just so many new features, but also i'm understanding
built-in functionality even better to solve problems that I just didn't have before so
at some point maybe i'll be like I know it all but
Uh, I feel the opposite. I feel like whoa, like I had no idea
Just one concrete example doing all the work with um templates and htmx and like coming to see the patterns about create
you know again fresh for the first time in use really using templates for the first time in half a decade it's like okay
Ah, yes
I create a template tag here and I do it this way and I use I put a mapper in here to create a kind
Of view model type thing so i'll pass in an orm model object into the template tag
And then in the template tag I map it to what I need in the actual template itself
Then the template comes in it's like oh, that's a really good and powerful pattern and it's really
Encapsulated and neat and it makes my template expressive and oh
rediscovering these things and then being able to say,
"Right, okay, well what changes does a Django template
"language need that it hasn't had in quite a few years
"because no one was using it?"
And, ah, yeah, it's just a massively fertile time.
- It is, and it's no coincidence that we've been
hitting on HTMX so much because it really puts the power
of frameworks like Django back front and center
in how you think about building and structuring
your web apps, right?
It's not like, "Well, there's this thing in the back end
and then we'll kind of go do these other languages.
It's like, you know, actually it could be all.
And there's a bunch of cool features and capabilities
that we've been talking about,
and you can use them throughout your app
if you leverage something like, not necessarily,
but something like HTMX, which is really cool, I think.
- And for me, it works just with the grain of the framework.
It's like, this is the way I would do it, you know,
if I was writing in 2005.
And I do it exactly the same in 2023.
And it just works and it's responsive and dynamic
and all these nice things that clients want.
- Yep, absolutely.
All right, let's leave it there, guys.
Thank you so much for covering all this
and celebrating Django's 18th birthday.
- 18th birthday, yeah.
- Yeah, it's awesome.
It is an adult and it's a cool framework for sure.
Really, I think it's the community behind it,
especially the fellows and all the board and stuff,
it makes it really unique and it's certainly worth
considering as part of the framework, right, as you said.
Okay, with that, let's round this out
with just a final shout out to
what you guys have around Django.
For example, the Django Chat podcast, right,
which is excellent.
Give us a shout about that, you know,
Will, tell us about Learn Django
and maybe button.dev or whatever else
you want to throw in there.
- Yeah, I should say djangochat.com,
you're sort of the godfather of it
'cause you gave me a lot of good advice
when we were starting out in the early days
around things and that there might be a market for it.
So thank you for that.
- You're welcome, it's going strong.
It's a great show.
I enjoy listening to the episodes.
- Yeah, so we're gonna be back in the fall
with new episodes.
And then learndjango.com, that's my main website
if you want to learn Django.
Access books, lots of free tutorials,
premium ones coming.
That's sort of an all-in-one resource.
And I think there's also a link to Django-news,
which is a weekly Django newsletter
with new news that's happening, new projects,
new tutorials, not just mine.
So that's something I've been doing with Jeff Triplett
for a number of years now,
and that's a good way to stay in tune with what's happening.
- Yeah, that's kind of an essential resource, I'd say.
- And then Button, Carlton.
- Yeah, so okay, so I'm, well, I've got a website
I've got a blog somewhere that's a button btn.dev
that'll be live in the autumn now.
But you can follow me on Foster Don or the Fediverse
and on my website there's an RSS feed
which you could subscribe to if you fancy that.
My other big projects at the moment
is I'm working on a set of opinionated crowd views
for Django called Neapolitan, which is a bit of fun.
I'm having a lot of fun of that.
to watch my DjangoCon Europe talk for an introduction of that.
And then I'm working on a package called Django template partials as well,
which is about getting template fragments into the Django template language,
which again, I'm talking about in the DjangoCon Europe talk.
I know, now that he's not a fellow, he can do all the things he always wanted to.
Yeah, when I started using this with Tristan,
I'm like, man, you have got to come up with a way
to like reuse HTML almost like functions.
So I came up with ginger partial. So what is yours called?
Uh, django template partials template partials and your template
Spacer that's close enough close enough. Yeah. No, it's not. I think I put a link in the notes. But yeah
There you go. Yeah, there you are. There you are. So that's my um my take.
And it just enables you to define um reusable components. there's there's a couple of pull requests open which will just
Just change the api there slightly and then we'll start to think about rolling into django. Hopefully for um now
It's going to be django 5.1. There's no chance of me getting in for 5.0 this summer.
But it's the same it's the same idea and the the point with it is it's integrated with the django template loader
So all you all you do in your view is change your template name
Variable and you still return your template response the same as you always had with the context. There's no there's no adjusting your view logic
Um, it's it's almost transparent to the view layer and there are you know
I've seen people writing logic where they they pass the hx vows
Which is where you pass extra parameters in your request from the client
Which you could then specify the partial with and then your view logic wouldn't change at all
um, that's out of scope for django template partials, but it's a possibility but the the point being that you just it's
It this for me or something like it is how django wants you to do
Partials with the Django template language. Obviously with ginger. There's an option as well with Django. So
Useful outside of htmx required for htmx basically, right?
Yeah, um
Yeah, I mean you because what's the other way the the problem with it is you are you then have if you don't have inline
Partials you have to move it to a separate template and then you have to include that template in the other template and that's great
a certain level of complexity, but again, it's this locality behavior thing when you're first starting you don't want that heavyweight kind of
In your creative flow you're making progress and all of a sudden you have to put the brakes on to create a new file
Move it open. What's the what's the file name again? Oh, i've spelt it wrong. Oh, it didn't load
Oh because it was in the wrong file. You don't want all of that. You just want inline that bit be reusable, please
- Yeah, very cool.
Yeah, this is different.
Mine doesn't embrace the locality behavior
as much as yours does.
So people should check this out.
This is interesting.
Obviously, mine doesn't work with Django either,
so it doesn't really matter.
- Well, it works with Jinja though, right?
- It works with Jinja, right?
- Mine, Jinja is swappable.
- So the Django templates have swappable backends
so you can use the Jinja backend
to use Jinja templates with Django
if that's your cup of tea.
- All right, we gotta end this podcast.
But if you're looking at--
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Moving a Flask project over to Django,
that would be a way to not touch the HTML very much, right?
- Yes, exactly, because you could carry on
using the same templates more.
You know, you might need one or two edits
to the, what's it called, the Django environment,
the Jinja environment or something to, I don't know.
- Cool, all right.
Thank you guys for being on the show.
It's always a great time to catch up with you.
- Yeah, thank you for having us.
- Yeah, you bet.